README.md, before:

# StateShot
💾 Non-aggressive history state management with structure sharing.

<p>
  <a href="https://travis-ci.org/doodlewind/stateshot">
    <img src="https://travis-ci.org/doodlewind/stateshot.svg?branch=master"/>
  </a>
  <a href='https://coveralls.io/github/doodlewind/stateshot?branch=master'>
    <img src='https://coveralls.io/repos/github/doodlewind/stateshot/badge.svg?branch=master' alt='Coverage Status'/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://unpkg.com/stateshot/dist/stateshot.min.js">
    <img src="http://img.badgesize.io/https://unpkg.com/stateshot/dist/stateshot.min.js?compression=gzip&amp;label=size&amp;maxAge=300"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://standardjs.com">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg"/>
  </a>
  <a href="./package.json">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/stateshot.svg?maxAge=300&label=version&colorB=007ec6&maxAge=300"/>
  </a>
</p>

> Just push your states into StateShot and `undo` / `redo` them!


## Getting Started

Install via NPM:

```bash
npm i stateshot
```

Basic usage:

```js
import { History } from 'stateshot'

const state = { a: 1, b: 2 }

const history = new History()
history.pushSync(state) // the terser `history.push` API is async

state.a = 2 // mutation!
history.pushSync(state)

history.get() // { a: 2, b: 2 }
history.undo().get() // { a: 1, b: 2 }
history.redo().get() // { a: 2, b: 2 }
```


## API

### `History`
`new History(options?: Options)`

Main class for state management, supported options:

* `rules` - Optional rules array for optimizing data transforming.
* `wait` - Debounce time for `push` in milliseconds, `50` by default.
* `maxLength` - Max length saving history states, `100` by default.

#### `push`
`(state: State, pickIndex?: Number) => Promise<History>`

Push state data in history, using `pushSync` under the hood. `state` doesn't have to be JSON serializable since you can define rules to parse it.

If `pickIndex` is specified, only this index of state's child will be serialized. Other children will be copied from previous record. This optimization only happens if previous records exists.

#### `pushSync`
`(state: State, pickIndex?: Number) => History`

Push state into history stack immediately. `pickIndex` also supported.

#### `undo`
`() => History`

Undo a record if possible, supports chaining, e.g., `undo().undo().get()`.

#### `redo`
`() => History`

Redo a record if possible, also supports chaining,

#### `hasUndo`
`Boolean`

Whether current state has undo records before.

#### `hasRedo`
`Boolean`

Whether current state has redo records after.

#### `get`
`() => State`

Pull out a history state from records.

#### `reset`
`() => History`

Clear internal data structure.


### `Rule`
`{ match: Function, toRecord: Function, fromRecord: Function }`

By defining rules you can specify how to transform between states and internal "chunks". Chunks are used for structure sharing.

> Rules are only designed for optimization. You don't have to learn or use them unless you've encountered performance bottleneck.

#### `match`
`node: StateNode => Boolean`

Defines whether a rule can be matched. For example, if you're saving a vDOM state with different `type` field, just define some rules like `node => node.type === 'image'` or `node => node.type === 'text'`.

#### `toRecord`
`StateNode => { chunks: Chunks, children: Children }`

For matched node, `chunks` is the serializable data we transform it into, and `children` picks out its children for further traversing (By default we traverse the `children` field in each state node). Usually one chunk is enough, but you can split a node into multi chunks in this manner:

```js
// Suppose `image` is a heavy field, we can split it into a standalone chunk.
const state = {
  type: 'container',
  children: [
    { type: 'image', left: 100, top: 100, image: 'foo' },
    { type: 'image', left: 200, top: 200, image: 'bar' },
    { type: 'image', left: 300, top: 300, image: 'baz' }
  ]
}

const toRecord = node => ({
  chunks: [
    { ...node, image: undefined },
    node.image
  ],
  children: null // no children since image node is leaf node.
})
```

#### `fromRecord`
`{ chunks: Chunks, children: Children } => StateNode`

Parse the chunks back into the state node. For case before:

```js
const fromRecord = ({ chunks, children }) => ({
  ...chunks[0],
  image: chunks[1]
})

const rule = {
  match: ({ type }) => type === 'image',
  toRecord,
  fromRecord
}
```

Commit message:

doc: add concepts and logo

README.md, after:

# StateShot
💾 Non-aggressive history state management with structure sharing.

<p>
  <a href="https://travis-ci.org/doodlewind/stateshot">
    <img src="https://travis-ci.org/doodlewind/stateshot.svg?branch=master"/>
  </a>
  <a href='https://coveralls.io/github/doodlewind/stateshot?branch=master'>
    <img src='https://coveralls.io/repos/github/doodlewind/stateshot/badge.svg?branch=master' alt='Coverage Status'/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://unpkg.com/stateshot/dist/stateshot.min.js">
    <img src="http://img.badgesize.io/https://unpkg.com/stateshot/dist/stateshot.min.js?compression=gzip&amp;label=size&amp;maxAge=300"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://standardjs.com">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg"/>
  </a>
  <a href="./package.json">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/stateshot.svg?maxAge=300&label=version&colorB=007ec6&maxAge=300"/>
  </a>
</p>

![stateshot](./resources/logo.png)

> Just push your states into StateShot and `undo` / `redo` them!


## Getting Started

Install via NPM:

```bash
npm i stateshot
```

Basic usage:

```js
import { History } from 'stateshot'

const state = { a: 1, b: 2 }

const history = new History()
history.pushSync(state) // the terser `history.push` API is async

state.a = 2 // mutation!
history.pushSync(state)

history.get() // { a: 2, b: 2 }
history.undo().get() // { a: 1, b: 2 }
history.redo().get() // { a: 2, b: 2 }
```

## Concepts
For history state management, the top need is the `undo` / `redo` API. That's what SnapShot provides out of the box, which can be simply described in image below:

![stateshot](./resources/concept-1.png)

Trivial, huh? while in real world projects, the price on saving full state is high. Immutable data structure is known to be suitabel for this, since it can share data structure in different references. However, this requires fully adaptation to immutable libs - can be hard indeed.

StateShot supports sharable data structure under its tiny API surface. The core concept is to serialize each node into chunks, computing chunks' hash and share same space if hash meets:

![stateshot](./resources/concept-2.png)

Besides the flexible rule-based transforming StateShot supports, it also provides another low-hanging fruit optimization for SPA apps. Suppose your root state is composed of multi "pages", editing on one page does not affect other pages. In this case computing hash on full state is inefficient. As a solution, you can simply specify a `pickIndex` on pushing new state, telling the lib which page to record:

![stateshot](./resources/concept-3.png)

With this hint, only the affected child's hash will be re-computed. Other children simply remains the same with previous record.


## API

### `History`
`new History(options?: Options)`

Main class for state management, supported options:

* `rules` - Optional rules array for optimizing data transforming.
* `wait` - Debounce time for `push` in milliseconds, `50` by default.
* `maxLength` - Max length saving history states, `100` by default.

#### `push`
`(state: State, pickIndex?: Number) => Promise<History>`

Push state data in history, using `pushSync` under the hood. `state` doesn't have to be JSON serializable since you can define rules to parse it.

If `pickIndex` is specified, only this index of state's child will be serialized. Other children will be copied from previous record. This optimization only happens if previous records exists.

#### `pushSync`
`(state: State, pickIndex?: Number) => History`

Push state into history stack immediately. `pickIndex` also supported.

#### `undo`
`() => History`

Undo a record if possible, supports chaining, e.g., `undo().undo().get()`.

#### `redo`
`() => History`

Redo a record if possible, also supports chaining,

#### `hasUndo`
`Boolean`

Whether current state has undo records before.

#### `hasRedo`
`Boolean`

Whether current state has redo records after.

#### `get`
`() => State`

Pull out a history state from records.

#### `reset`
`() => History`

Clear internal data structure.


### `Rule`
`{ match: Function, toRecord: Function, fromRecord: Function }`

By defining rules you can specify how to transform between states and internal "chunks". Chunks are used for structure sharing.

> Rules are only designed for optimization. You don't have to learn or use them unless you've encountered performance bottleneck.

#### `match`
`node: StateNode => Boolean`

Defines whether a rule can be matched. For example, if you're saving a vDOM state with different `type` field, just define some rules like `node => node.type === 'image'` or `node => node.type === 'text'`.

#### `toRecord`
`StateNode => { chunks: Chunks, children: Children }`

For matched node, `chunks` is the serializable data we transform it into, and `children` picks out its children for further traversing (By default we traverse the `children` field in each state node). Usually one chunk is enough, but you can split a node into multi chunks in this manner:

```js
// Suppose `image` is a heavy field, we can split it into a standalone chunk.
const state = {
  type: 'container',
  children: [
    { type: 'image', left: 100, top: 100, image: 'foo' },
    { type: 'image', left: 200, top: 200, image: 'bar' },
    { type: 'image', left: 300, top: 300, image: 'baz' }
  ]
}

const toRecord = node => ({
  chunks: [
    { ...node, image: undefined },
    node.image
  ],
  children: null // no children since image node is leaf node.
})
```

#### `fromRecord`
`{ chunks: Chunks, children: Children } => StateNode`

Parse the chunks back into the state node. For case before:

```js
const fromRecord = ({ chunks, children }) => ({
  ...chunks[0],
  image: chunks[1]
})

const rule = {
  match: ({ type }) => type === 'image',
  toRecord,
  fromRecord
}
```
